So for our verbs we have e for i, ablar to speak, able I spoke, and o for he, she it, you formal.
And we're accenting our endings.
Able a blo ear verbs we have an e sound, so an eye, an eye
for for I and io i o for he she it so we have i and io so if we go to comer to eat i eight is komi
And he eight, she eight, it eight, you formulate is komio.
We're accenting the endings again.
The I and the O.
Komi, komyo.
Komi, komio.
Good.
What was salir?
Salir?
To leave?
To leave or to go out.
So how would you say I went out or I left?
Sali.
She went out, she left.
Salio.
Good.
She didn't go out yet.
She didn't leave yet.
No salió todavía.
Good.
I don't know why she didn't leave yet.
No sé por qué no sal yo todavía.
Good.
No sé por qué no salió todavía.
What did ke mean?
What does that mean?
What?
Yes, what?
And what else does it mean?
That.
That in like I hope that espero que good
So apart from what and that, ke also means than.
Than.
So you can use it like this.
So you could say, for example, I ate more than him.
I ate is the first bit
Comme er ear verb komi good.
I ate more than him.
Come
K L Good Not him than he more than he ate.
Come I ate more than him or more than he ate.
Good.
He ate more than me.
Comio, mas ke and I'm not sure if it's me or Migo.
When we said com me mas que el, we put el there because whilst in English we say him
What we really mean is he I ate more than he ate.
It's quite peculiar in English that we say him and not he
So in Spanish we're being more literal.
Comi masque él.
I ate more than he.
So he ate more than me.
Comio másque.
Yo.
Exactly.
So he ate more than I.
He ate more than I ate.
So how would that be?
Komio mas keyo.
Good.
Komio maskeyo.
It's actually quite peculiar in English that we say me.
In fact, the way we use words like me instead of I is very peculiar in English.
and it's a negative language transfer that could influence other languages that you're learning.
For example, if I say who wants to go to the park, you might say me.
This doesn't make any sense.
It's I I want to go to the park.
There's this me.
So there is some
strange use of these words in English that might influence our Spanish so we need to cut that negative language transfer when we identify it popping up.
So como yo más que yo he ate more than I he ate more than I ate.
What was to see?
Ver.
Ver, good.
I saw.
Ver is regular here.
Uh huh.
So I saw
So go back to Khmer, use that as your hook.
V.
Good.
I saw him.
Lo V.
Good.
Lo vi.
I didn't see him
Nolovi.
I saw him, but he didn't see me.
And as we're contrasting, we will probably use one or both of the words for I.
And he.
Those words we don't need to use.
We will probably use one or both of them here as we're contrasting.
Although you don't need to, so it's up to you.
I saw him, but he didn't see me.
First bit is I saw him
Lovi.
But he didn't see me.
Pero no me vio.
Good.
Lovi, pero no me vio.
And like I said, let's be contrasting.
We might feel an urge to say the word for él, lo vi, pero él no me vio, or yo lo vi, pero él no me vio.
It depends on the context.
Even if you have context then you know who you're talking about.
You might feel yourself wanting to say these words because you're contrasting
The word for nothing, nothing, in Spanish is nada, nada, nada.
N A D A.
Nada.
And we have double negative in Spanish, which means you can say, I didn't see nothing.
No vinada.
Good.
No vi nada.
I didn't eat anything.
No cominada.
Didn't you eat anything?
Speaking formally.
No comio nada.
Good.
The word for nobody is Nadia.
Nadia.
N-A-D-I-E Nadia.
Nobody saw anything.
Nobody saw nothing.
Nadie vio nada.
Good.
Nobody saw anything.
Durar durar means to last.
Durar durar.
We have endure in English duration.
Duration.
And you even get like corporate names that use these Latin roots
and kind of appeal to your understanding without you realizing that you understand it.
So for example you have duracel batteries.
You know what that means, but you don't know why you know what it means.
So you can identify this kind of use of Latin
in industry and uh how it's appealing to your subconscious understanding of the message that they want to give you about the products
So look out for that.
So durar to last.
Minute in Spanish is uh minuto.
So how would you say it lasted two minutes?
It lasted two minutes
Duro dos minutos.
Very good.
I lasted two minutes.
Dure dos minutos.
Good.
We looked at before how you can get this ing adjective, so the adjective that we have for ing, like interesting.
Using ante oriente.
So interesting was interesante.
So druing is not an adjective, but it's formed in the same way.
So how do you think you say drewing in Spanish?
Durante.
Yes.
So you could say during two minutes
Durante dos minutos.
Good.
And you can use that like for as well.
So we said that with time you can say por dos minutos, but you can also say durante.
You will hear that as well in Spanish.
Durante
dos minutos during two minutes, four two minutes.
What was to eat?
Comer.
Comer, good.
And he ate
Comio.
How would you say he ate for half an hour or he ate during half an hour?
Half an hour is media, half.
And what was hour?
Aura like in aura media aura good so he ate during half an hour he ate for half an hour
Comio durante media ora.
Good.
He spoke during half an hour for half an hour.
Hablo durante media ora.
What was with in Spanish?
Con without in Spanish is sin, sin, sin, sin, sin
And to stop to stop is parar parar parar parar
So you could say he spoke for half an hour without stopping.
He spoke for half an hour without stopping
Hablo durante media hora sin parar.
Good.
And we said that after prepositions, so sin is a preposition, we're not saying stopping, we're saying to stop.
Sin parar.
Without to stop.
Hablo durante media hora sin parar.
Parar is interesting because par par in Spanish means pear.
So un par is a pear.
So like a pair of shoes, un par de zapatos.
Un par de zapatos.
So parar to stop might be the pairing.
You can imagine this kind of time and space notion of two things pairing, reaching each other, and then stopping
And then comparar to compare is with pairing.
So even though this is an M here, it's con.
The N has been softened by that P, which is why we say compare.
So with pairing is to compare.
Prepare, of course, is pre-pairing.
We can see this in English as well.
Repair, to repair is to repair, to pair up again.
Separar is to separate in Spanish.
Separation, separacion, separar.
And this se means apart.
So to separate is to pair apart, to pair apart